Two Abilities: Physical, and Mental

These two stats are you base score of any Non-Proficient/Unknown skill attempts. 

  Examples: 
  Bob needs to cut down a tree; having never done this before he will roll with his base Physical Modifier of +1. As he is untrained, non-proficient, and never cut down a tree before he can not influence the process outside of his Physical Abilities to hack down the tree. Small tree so Diff Check of 10, Bob rolls a 9 so he succeeds with the addition of his modifier, but unfortunately the tree has fallen on a house.... 

  Sylivia has been tasked with leading a Prayer to Heracule. As Sylivia is a mage her devotions have been devoid of religious influence and training but her high Mental Modifier will surely help in the task at hand.  Heracule is a common god and as such the Prayer Diff will be set at 8; Sylivia rolling a 12, adding her +2 Modifier makes it look as if she is a devout follower of Heracule.

Base abilities are determined by rolling 3d6 and re-rolling 1s and 2s.  This will put you in nomral to exceptional ranges but not at the extreme ends of the ranges.  1-5 = Weak/Simple, 6-10 = Normal, 11-15 = Gifted, 16-20 = Exceptional

There is no ability score above 20 nor below 1 with out magical/devine/traumatic interaction.

There is also not permanent scores above 20 nor below 1, only temporary. 


Defining Skills:

Acquisition of skills is based of your Mental Ability; your ability to 'learn' the skill. At the creation of your character take your base Mental score and divide it by two; this will provide your starting skills.  At each new level you will be able to add skills equal to your Mental Ability divided by 3 (rounding down if needed)
At the time of generation and every level after you can choose a skill and gain 1 rank in that skill to a max of 5 ranks.  Skill progression, every 5 ranks adds an additional skill point requirement. 1-5 = Skilled, 6-10 = Specialized, 11-15 = Expert, 16-20 = Master   Examples: a Throwing skill of 6 would require a total point cost of 7 skill points, a Casting rank of 12 would take 21 skill points.

(As you gain skill ranks you will find you self as the cross roads of General Skill vs Specialization: Bludgeoning weapons covers any non-bladed weapon.  So a Club gets the same skill points as a Mace.  Spell Casting vs Necromancy is another example of generalization vs specialization.  These differences are where you define your character; are you a Druid or a Wizard; Fighter/Soldier or a Sword Master.  Generalist skills lend themselves to multi-class paths.)

Skill Adjacency: Skill with a Great Sword does not translate to using a Rapier; Nor does skill with a Club translate to the use of a War Hammer.  But given the adjacency of the skills you can half you current skill to affect adjacent skills.  Any adjacent skill use is at the discretion of the Story Teller.

There are NO skills that can not utilize both abilities.  Even something like spell casting can be improved with Physical dexterity; fluid movements for the somatic portion of the casting. Another example at advanced levels the ability to dodge a blow while maintaining focus.

Taking a skill one needs to pick if they are devoting physical or mental effort to the skill (on the rare occasions where it is not evident how the abilities applies, a brief explanation/detail on your character sheet is a good idea), at that point they are proficient.  As they progress they can then pick that same skill again applying the same attribute or the other ability and as such they would be compounding their abilities. 


The variety and spice of the game will fall on the Story Teller in giving entertaining outcomes of critical success, or miserable fumbles. There is also the ability to add value to close call successes and verbosity to 'normal' success.