Defining Skills:

Acquisition of skills is based of your Mental Ability; your ability to 'learn' the skill. At the creation of your character take your base Mental score and divide it by two; this will provide your starting skills.  At each new level you will be able to add skills equal to your Mental Ability divided by 3 (rounding down if needed)
At the time of generation and every level after you can choose a skill and gain 1 rank in that skill to a max of 5 ranks.  Skill progression, every 5 ranks adds an additional skill point requirement. 1-5 = Skilled, 6-10 = Specialized, 11-15 = Expert, 16-20 = Master   Examples: a Throwing skill of 6 would require a total point cost of 7 skill points, a Casting rank of 12 would take 21 skill points.

(As you gain skill ranks you will find you self as the cross roads of General Skill vs Specialization: Bludgeoning weapons covers any non-bladed weapon.  So a Club gets the same skill points as a Mace.  Spell Casting vs Necromancy is another example of generalization vs specialization.  These differences are where you define your character; are you a Druid or a Wizard; Fighter/Soldier or a Sword Master.  Generalist skills lend themselves to multi-class paths.)

Skill Adjacency: Skill with a Great Sword does not translate to using a Rapier; Nor does skill with a Club translate to the use of a War Hammer.  But given the adjacency of the skills you can half you current skill to affect adjacent skills.  Any adjacent skill use is at the discretion of the Story Teller.

There are NO skills that can not utilize both abilities.  Even something like spell casting can be improved with Physical dexterity; fluid movements for the somatic portion of the casting. Another example at advanced levels the ability to dodge a blow while maintaining focus.

Taking a skill one needs to pick if they are devoting physical or mental effort to the skill (on the rare occasions where it is not evident how the abilities applies, a brief explanation/detail on your character sheet is a good idea), at that point they are proficient.  As they progress they can then pick that same skill again applying the same attribute or the other ability and as such they would be compounding their abilities. 




Mounted/Riding
Athletics
  Running
  Swimming
  Heavy Lifting
Acrobatics
  Arial
  Ground
  Parkour
Combat
  Melee
    Offensive
    Defensive
    Strategy
  Ranged
    Offensive
    Defensive
    Strategy
Entry
  Forced
    Brute Force
      Kicking the Door in or taking the door off it's hinges
    Finessed
      Lock Picking or a fanciful performance to get past the guards
Manual Labor (read as assisting skilled laborer)
  Foresty
  Masonry
  Dock Work
  Construction